This is evolution simulator The Sapling, a game where you design your own ecosystem of plants and animals. More specifically, this is the flower update, which I recently released. It adds flowers and bioluminescence, among other things. 

For all of these new things I obviously needed new 3D models, but I discovered that I didn't have the 3D modeling skills to create the things I wanted, at least not efficiently, so I was forced to learn a ton of new things in a really short amount of time. Because I'm very excited about the new things I learned, I wanted to share them with you in a series of 5 short modeling timelapses; I will publish a new video every Tuesday over the coming five weeks. 

===

This is the first one, which is a technique to create rocks with sharper angles, giving it a slightly more cartoony look. So far, all rocks had been created by modifying subdivided cubes, but this resulted in rocks that looked like weird egg like things. I watched many hours of other 3D artists modeling rocks, using a variety of techniques, and this is the one I liked best; it's a bit a like how I imagine rocks emerge in real life, with larger and smaller pieces being cut off one by one.

This is the second timelapse, which is about creating a new type of leaf with a more alien look. The flower update adds bioluminescence, which in popular media is typically used for alien flora. I figured bioluminescence might inspire users to create more alien looking plants, and a spiral shaped leaf was the first thing I came up with. To create spirals in Blender you need to activate some special functionality, which is what you see me doing in the beginning of the video, but after that it is mostly a matter of regular moving, scaling and extruding.

This is the third timelapse, which is about creating a wind pollination organ. While you see various shapes of wind pollination organs in nature, I wanted mine to look like pinecones. This is because this would go well with the needle leaf type I already had, and pine trees are of course typical wind pollinators. The trick to make this relatively low poly model is to start with an egg shape, replace all existing vertices with a face, and then extract all of these faces individually.

This is the fourth timelapse, which is about creating a simple flower model. While this is not that special by itself, what I had to learn here is how to apply the same changes to all six petals at once. This means that I am doing a lot of individual extrudes, and changing the center point of transformations. Most of the other flower types in the game were created in a similar way.

This is fifth and final timelapse, which is about a special kind of flower model that I call the umbrella flower. Like with the simple flower model, there is a lot of making sure that I do the same thing to all sides at once, like the rib like structure. The flower consists of two parts, and I hesitated for a long time whether I wanted to add a third one. In the end, I opted not to because this would add a lot of extra polygons to a game that already had performance issues at the time.